

Sivakumar2011_WntSignalingPathway

The secreted protein Wnt activates the heptahelical receptor Frizzled on
nieghboring cells. Activation of Frizzled causes the recruitment of additional
membrane proteins which in turn result in 1) the activation of the protein
Dishevelled via phosphorylation and 2) the activation of a heterotrimeric G
protein of unknown type. Activation of Dishevelled results in the down-
regulation of the Beta-Catenin destruction complex which causes ubiquitination
of Beta-Catenin and its ultimate degradation via the proteasome. Inhibition of
the Beta-Catenin destruction complex yields a higher cytosolic concentration
of Beta-Catenin, which enters the nucleus, binds various transcriptional
regulatory molecules including the TCF/LEF class of proteins, and results in
the transcription of TCF/LEF target genes. Activation of the heterotrimeric
G-protein pathway in turn activates Phospholipase C which in turn catalyzes
the catalysis of PI(4,5)P2 into DAG and IP3.  
  
Reference:  

  * [The Wnt signalling pathway.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12356903)
  * [You Wnt some, you lose some: oncogenes in the Wnt signaling pathway.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12573432)
  * [Wnt signaling pathway.](http://www.biocarta.com/pathfiles/h_wntPathway.asp)
  

This model is described in the article:

[A systems biology approach to model neural stem cell regulation by notch,
shh, wnt, and EGF signaling pathways.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/21978399)

Sivakumar KC, Dhanesh SB, Shobana S, James J, Mundayoor S.

OMICS 2011 Oct; 15(10): 729-737

Abstract:

The Notch, Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), Wnt, and EGF pathways have long been known to
influence cell fate specification in the developing nervous system. Here we
attempted to evaluate the contemporary knowledge about neural stem cell
differentiation promoted by various drug-based regulations through a systems
biology approach. Our model showed the phenomenon of DAPT-mediated antagonism
of Enhancer of split [E(spl)] genes and enhancement of Shh target genes by a
SAG agonist that were effectively demonstrated computationally and were
consistent with experimental studies. However, in the case of model simulation
of Wnt and EGF pathways, the model network did not supply any concurrent
results with experimental data despite the fact that drugs were added at the
appropriate positions. This paves insight into the potential of crosstalks
between pathways considered in our study. Therefore, we manually developed a
map of signaling crosstalk, which included the species connected by
representatives from Notch, Shh, Wnt, and EGF pathways and highlighted the
regulation of a single target gene, Hes-1, based on drug-induced simulations.
These simulations provided results that matched with experimental studies.
Therefore, these signaling crosstalk models complement as a tool toward the
discovery of novel regulatory processes involved in neural stem cell
maintenance, proliferation, and differentiation during mammalian central
nervous system development. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a
simple crosstalk map that highlights the differential regulation of neural
stem cell differentiation and underscores the flow of positive and negative
regulatory signals modulated by drugs.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000397](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000397).

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024).

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

